README.md, before:

# RolandZenDecodeXML Build 6
A tool to decode Roland editor XML files (initially Jupiter X/Xm and ZenCore) and generate JSON and a Javascript module with byte offsets (for files)
and SYSEX locations/length, with HTML output tables for easy reading. 

The data generated here is going to work with the Roland Jupiter X/Xm, Fantom 6/7/8 and 06/07/08, Juno-X, Zenology files etc. 

Copies of the current output are available in the `out` directory (minus padding entries). You will only need to download and run this if you want to change the configuration to import more items or use a different source. You will also need to install a Roland editor and copy the files from it.

If you are interested in pulling apart these files or project/sound files to create useful tools you could come and join us at [Discord](https://discord.gg/gP3tmPpf55)

Also available is a tool for peeking into the structure of SVZ and MC-707/101 PRJ files at [**ZenInspector**](https://splunge.foo/zeninspector/) which I update when I figure out new information.

Conversion from the original PHP and all following work done with AI.

## Limitations

Does not work with Altenate type blocks (SURFACE is a good example)

## Translations

The XML files from Roland editors contain comments in Japanese that provide important context about the data structures. These comments have been extracted and translated into English in [**translations.md**](translations.md). 

The translations can help understand the purpose and structure of various blocks, parameters, and groups defined in the XML files.

## Setup

### Prerequisites
- Node.js (version 18 or higher recommended)

### Installation

```bash
npm install
```

For the default `jupiter` config, you will need to copy the .xml files from the
Roland Jupiter X/Xm editor (available on Roland's website) into a subdirectory called `jupiter_xml`.

- Copy all the files from `C:\Users\Public\Documents\Roland Editor Library\JUPITERprmdb` into `jupiter_xml`
- Sorry no idea where Mac ones are, almost certainly in your user Library, or in the app itself
- Other sets are available in the Juno-X editor and Zenbeats

## Usage

```bash
node decode.js <config_name> [output_directory]
```

Where:
- `<config_name>` is the filename of a JSON file in the config directory (do not include the .json extension)
- `[output_directory]` is an optional output directory name (defaults to `out`)

Examples:

```bash
node decode.js jupiter
```

This will use the default `out` directory.

```bash
node decode.js jupiter custom_output
```

This will write output files to the `custom_output` directory (created automatically if it doesn't exist).

## Output
In the output directory three files will be created:

- `<config_name>.json` the full data
- `<config_name>.js` the full data formatted as a module (so like above but starts with `export default`)
- `<config_name>.html` a reference in HTML

## Config files

See `config/jupiter.json` for a fully formed example.

Config information is in two chunks

    settings
    importXML

### config : `settings`
Configuration settings:

    "settings": {
        "includePadding":false,
        "prettyJSON" : false,
        "includeSysex": true,
        "truncateName": false
    },

- `includePadding` - the binary layout of the information has padding added in places, which is invisible to the SYSEX layout. Turning this to `true` will include entries for the padding. Mainly useful to check generation as otherwise the padding is included but not listed as an actual element, so might be difficult to spot.
- `prettyJSON` - Will pretty print the JSON and JS output. Not recommended as it makes the file huge.
- `includeSysex` - Include SYSEX-related data in the output (offset, length, value offset). Default `true`. Set to `false` to output only byte offset information.
- `truncateName` - In table output, only show the first entry of numbered sequences (e.g., show `NAME_1` but skip `NAME_2` through `NAME_16`). Default `false`. The JSON output still contains all entries.

### config : `importXML`

An array of objects listing the file to import from, and items to import

    "importXML": [ {
        "file":"jupiter_xml/db_muse_pcmex.xml",
        "blocks":[
            "PCMT_CMN",
            "PCMS_PMT",
            ...
            ]
        }, {
        "file": "jupiter_xml/db_bmc0.xml",
        "blocks": [
           "TONECOM"
            ],
        "groups": [
           "PCMEX"
            ]
        }
    ]

The list of names within `blocks` corresponds to a block entry in the XML file:

    <baseblock name="PCMS_PMT" desc="PCMSynth PMT">
	    <param id="STRUCT12" init="0" min="0" max="4" desc="Structure1-2" .../>
        ...

Whilst `groups` corresponds to an entry like this:

    <group name="PCMEX">
	    <block id="common"			baseblock="PCMT_CMN"						size="00.01.00" />
        ...

Groups are containers for blocks and some of these may have multiple copies (i.e. one for each partial).

## Output

A `.js` and `.json` are created, the only difference being the .js creates and object and exports it, ready to plug into some code. Also instead of being just a big chunk of json, each group, block and subblock are added to the object, so references can be pre-populated.

We will refer to all items as `blocks` as the structure is the same.

### Block Structure

The top level object contains blocks and these contain a `parameters` object where each parameter is keyed by its `id`:

```json
  "INST_CMN": {
    "name": "INST_CMN",
    "description": "Instrument Common",
    "byteLength": 140,
    "parameters": {
      "NAME_1": { ... },
      "CATEGORY": { ... },
      "LEVEL": { ... },
      "WMT": { ... }
    }
  }
```

### Simple Parameter example, range of values
```json
"PHRASE_VEL_SHIFT": {
    "id": "PHRASE_VEL_SHIFT",
    "description": "Phrase Velo Shift",
    "byteOffset": 24,                       // byte offset from start of block
    "byteLength": 1,                        // length of binary data block
    "sysexOffset": 23,                      // sysex offset from start of block (decimal)
    "lengthSysex": 2,                       // length of sysex data. more than 1 = use lower nibbles
    "dataRange": [                          // range of data 
        -100,
        100
    ],
    "initValue": 0,                         // initial value
    "sysexValueOffset": 128,                // offset for binary/sysex value. so 0 as real data is encoded 
                                            // as 128 in sysex. Binary values are signed. 
    "isPadding": false,                     // padding = no useful value, only enabled by option
    "values": null                          // map of value => description or null for plain integers
}
```
### Example with set values
```json
"ctrlSrc1": {
    "id": "ctrlSrc1",
    "description": "MFX CtrlSrc 1",
    "byteOffset": 4,
    "byteLength": 1,
    "sysexOffset": 4,
    "lengthSysex": 1,
    "dataRange": [
        0,
        100
    ],
    "initValue": 0,
    "sysexValueOffset": 0,
    "isPadding": false,
    "values": {                           // map of value => description
        "0": "OFF",
        "1": "MOD:CC01",
        "2": "BRETH:CC02",
        "3": "CC03",
        "4": "FOOT:CC04",
        "5": "PTIME:CC05",
        "6": "DENT:CC06",
        ...
    ]
}
```
Some parameters can have a measurement name attached (such as db or cent) and also there is scaling applied to the original data value:
```json
{
"id": "RELEASE",
"description": "Comp Release Time",
"byteOffset": 2,
"byteLength": 1,
"sysexOffset": 2,
"lengthSysex": 1,
"dataRange": [
    0,
    99
],
"initValue": 0,
"sysexValueOffset": 0,
"isPadding": false,
"values": null,
"displayMeasurement": "ms",         // 
"displayRange": [                   // scale dataRange to displayRange
    "10",
    "1000"
]
}
```

### Subblock Parameters

When a block contains a subblock (whether from a `group->block` or a `block->subblock`), it contains a parameter entry that references it, in the `.js` version, it is already linked through property `block`

```json
"WMT" : {
    "id": "WMT",                        // subblock ID (from XML)
    "blockName": "INST_CMN_WMT",        // name of the separate block created for this subblock
    "count": 4,                         // number of array instances
    "byteOffset": 28,                   // byte offset of item #0 (code should calculate addresses in real time)
    "blockByteLength": 28,              // size of a single subblock instance
    "byteLength": 112,                  // total size (blockByteLength * count)
    "description": "WMT",               // description from XML

    // only in.js version
    "block": ZenProperties["INST_CMN_WMT"]
}
```

The referenced block (`INST_CMN_WMT` in this example) exists as a separate top-level block with its own `parameters` object. Subblock parameters are identified by the presence of the `blockName` field.

**Array Item Address Calculation**: For array items (subblocks or blocks in groups), `byteOffset` stores the address of item #0. To calculate the address of item `i`, use: `address = byteOffset + (i * blockByteLength)`. The HTML documentation output shows all array items with their calculated addresses, but the JSON/JS output stores only the base offset for efficiency.

### Group Structure

Groups are containers for blocks and have a similar structure to blocks:

```json
  "VoDsgn": {
    "name": "VoDsgn",
    "description": "Voice Design",
    "byteLength": 136,
    "parameters": {
      "PCMT_CMN": {
        "blockName": "PCMT_CMN",
        "count": 1,
        "byteOffset": 0,
        "blockByteLength": 32,
        "byteLength": 32
      },
      "PCMS_PMT": {
        "blockName": "PCMS_PMT",
        "count": 4,
        "byteOffset": 32,
        "blockByteLength": 26,
        "byteLength": 104
      }
    }
  }
```

Groups contain a `parameters` object where each entry references a block. Block references within groups use the same structure as subblock parameters: `byteOffset` stores the address of item #0, and addresses for array items are calculated at runtime.

## Changelog
**Build 6 - Standalone HTML Generation**

- **Removed TableGen dependency**: HTML tables are now generated directly without the TableGen library. All table generation code is self-contained in `generateHTMLFromZenProperties.js`.

- **Removed text output**: Plain text (`.txt`) output has been removed. Only HTML output is generated for documentation.

- **Standalone generateHTML module**: The `generateHTMLFromZenProperties.js` module is now fully standalone and can be used independently. It takes a ZenProperties object and generates HTML without requiring external template files or dependencies.

- **Integrated HTML template**: The HTML template is now embedded directly in `generateHTMLFromZenProperties.js`, eliminating the need for a separate `template.html` file.

**Build 5**

- **Subblock parameters use single byteOffset value**: When a parameter references a subblock (indicated by the presence of a `blockName` field), the `byteOffset` field contains the address of item #0. Addresses for other array items are calculated at runtime using: `address = byteOffset + (index * blockByteLength)`. This applies to both subblocks within blocks and block references within groups. The HTML documentation output shows all array items with their calculated addresses for reference.

- **Property name changes**: 
  - `lengthBytes` has been renamed to `byteLength` for consistency with the `byteLength` property used at the block level.
  - `totalByteLength` has been renamed to `byteLength` in groups and block references within groups for consistency with the naming convention used throughout the codebase.

**Build 4 - JavaScript Port**

Converted from PHP to JavaScript (Node.js). Now uses `fast-xml-parser` for XML parsing.
Run with `node decode.js <config_name> [output_dir]` instead of `php decode.php <config_name>`.

**Format Changes in Build 4:**

The JSON output format has been unified in Build 4:

- **Blocks and Groups are now the same structure**: Both blocks and groups are stored as top-level objects in the JSON. Groups contain references to blocks with array information, but the structure is consistent.

- **Parameters are now objects keyed by ID**: The `parameters` field in blocks is now an object (not an array) where each parameter is keyed by its `id`. This allows direct access to parameters by ID (e.g., `block.parameters.NAME_1` instead of searching through an array).

- **Subblocks are created as separate blocks**: When a block contains a `<subblock>` element, the subblock is parsed as a separate block definition (e.g., `INST_CMN_WMT` is a separate block from `INST_CMN`). The parent block contains a parameter entry that references the subblock.


**Build 3**

Added `displayMeasurement` and `displayRange`. Fixes invalid item issues with EQ section.
Added ModelSyn and PCM Rythm structures to output, plus some model data.
Changed `valueOffset` to `sysexValueOffset` as it only influences data sent by sysex.

## Limitations

Doesn't fully/correctly process all the xml files, not sure how it all fits together as a whole, so just picking the parts I know I need right now.

Currently doesn't not process `<alternate>` sections for union types (e.g. MFX or Model)

Commit message:

Enhance block and group categorization: Added a `category` field to all blocks and groups, defaulting to "Autogenerated: <config_name>". Updated HTML output to organize content by category with a top-level table of contents. Improved handling of padding entries by conditionally including the `isPadding` field. Updated README to reflect these changes and added a new STRUCTURE.md for documentation.

README.md, after:

# RolandZenDecodeXML Build 7
A tool to decode Roland editor XML files (initially Jupiter X/Xm and ZenCore) and generate JSON and a Javascript module with byte offsets (for files)
and SYSEX locations/length, with HTML output tables for easy reading. 

**📖 [TLDR Structure document](STRUCTURE.md)** - Compact reference for understanding the output object structure.

The data generated here is going to work with the Roland Jupiter X/Xm, Fantom 6/7/8 and 06/07/08, Juno-X, Zenology files etc. 

Copies of the current output are available in the `out` directory (minus padding entries). You will only need to download and run this if you want to change the configuration to import more items or use a different source. You will also need to install a Roland editor and copy the files from it.

If you are interested in pulling apart these files or project/sound files to create useful tools you could come and join us at [Discord](https://discord.gg/gP3tmPpf55)

Also available is a tool for peeking into the structure of SVZ and MC-707/101 PRJ files at [**ZenInspector**](https://splunge.foo/zeninspector/) which I update when I figure out new information.

Conversion from the original PHP and all following work done with AI.

## Limitations

Does not work with Altenate type blocks (SURFACE is a good example)

## Translations

The XML files from Roland editors contain comments in Japanese that provide important context about the data structures. These comments have been extracted and translated into English in [**translations.md**](translations.md). 

The translations can help understand the purpose and structure of various blocks, parameters, and groups defined in the XML files.

## Setup

### Prerequisites
- Node.js (version 18 or higher recommended)

### Installation

```bash
npm install
```

For the default `jupiter` config, you will need to copy the .xml files from the
Roland Jupiter X/Xm editor (available on Roland's website) into a subdirectory called `jupiter_xml`.

- Copy all the files from `C:\Users\Public\Documents\Roland Editor Library\JUPITERprmdb` into `jupiter_xml`
- Sorry no idea where Mac ones are, almost certainly in your user Library, or in the app itself
- Other sets are available in the Juno-X editor and Zenbeats

## Usage

```bash
node decode.js <config_name> [output_directory]
```

Where:
- `<config_name>` is the filename of a JSON file in the config directory (do not include the .json extension)
- `[output_directory]` is an optional output directory name (defaults to `out`)

Examples:

```bash
node decode.js jupiter
```

This will use the default `out` directory.

```bash
node decode.js jupiter custom_output
```

This will write output files to the `custom_output` directory (created automatically if it doesn't exist).

## Output
In the output directory three files will be created:

- `<config_name>.json` the full data
- `<config_name>.js` the full data formatted as a module (so like above but starts with `export default`)
- `<config_name>.html` a reference in HTML

## Config files

See `config/jupiter.json` for a fully formed example.

Config information is in two chunks

    settings
    importXML

### config : `settings`
Configuration settings:

    "settings": {
        "includePadding":false,
        "prettyJSON" : false,
        "includeSysex": true,
        "truncateName": false
    },

- `includePadding` - the binary layout of the information has padding added in places, which is invisible to the SYSEX layout. Turning this to `true` will include entries for the padding. Mainly useful to check generation as otherwise the padding is included but not listed as an actual element, so might be difficult to spot.
- `prettyJSON` - Will pretty print the JSON and JS output. Not recommended as it makes the file huge.
- `includeSysex` - Include SYSEX-related data in the output (offset, length, value offset). Default `true`. Set to `false` to output only byte offset information.
- `truncateName` - In table output, only show the first entry of numbered sequences (e.g., show `NAME_1` but skip `NAME_2` through `NAME_16`). Default `false`. The JSON output still contains all entries.

### config : `importXML`

An array of objects listing the file to import from, and items to import

    "importXML": [ {
        "file":"jupiter_xml/db_muse_pcmex.xml",
        "blocks":[
            "PCMT_CMN",
            "PCMS_PMT",
            ...
            ]
        }, {
        "file": "jupiter_xml/db_bmc0.xml",
        "blocks": [
           "TONECOM"
            ],
        "groups": [
           "PCMEX"
            ]
        }
    ]

The list of names within `blocks` corresponds to a block entry in the XML file:

    <baseblock name="PCMS_PMT" desc="PCMSynth PMT">
	    <param id="STRUCT12" init="0" min="0" max="4" desc="Structure1-2" .../>
        ...

Whilst `groups` corresponds to an entry like this:

    <group name="PCMEX">
	    <block id="common"			baseblock="PCMT_CMN"						size="00.01.00" />
        ...

Groups are containers for blocks and some of these may have multiple copies (i.e. one for each partial).

## Output

A `.js` and `.json` are created, the only difference being the .js creates and object and exports it, ready to plug into some code. Also instead of being just a big chunk of json, each group, block and subblock are added to the object, so references can be pre-populated.

We will refer to all items as `blocks` as the structure is the same.

### Block Structure

The top level object contains blocks and these contain a `parameters` object where each parameter is keyed by its `id`:

```json
  "INST_CMN": {
    "name": "INST_CMN",
    "description": "Instrument Common",
    "byteLength": 140,
    "parameters": {
      "NAME_1": { ... },
      "CATEGORY": { ... },
      "LEVEL": { ... },
      "WMT": { ... }
    }
  }
```

### Simple Parameter example, range of values
```json
"PHRASE_VEL_SHIFT": {
    "id": "PHRASE_VEL_SHIFT",
    "description": "Phrase Velo Shift",
    "byteOffset": 24,                       // byte offset from start of block
    "byteLength": 1,                        // length of binary data block
    "sysexOffset": 23,                      // sysex offset from start of block (decimal)
    "lengthSysex": 2,                       // length of sysex data. more than 1 = use lower nibbles
    "dataRange": [                          // range of data 
        -100,
        100
    ],
    "initValue": 0,                         // initial value
    "sysexValueOffset": 128,                // offset for binary/sysex value. so 0 as real data is encoded 
                                            // as 128 in sysex. Binary values are signed. 
    "isPadding": false,                     // padding = no useful value, only enabled by option
    "values": null                          // map of value => description or null for plain integers
}
```
### Example with set values
```json
"ctrlSrc1": {
    "id": "ctrlSrc1",
    "description": "MFX CtrlSrc 1",
    "byteOffset": 4,
    "byteLength": 1,
    "sysexOffset": 4,
    "lengthSysex": 1,
    "dataRange": [
        0,
        100
    ],
    "initValue": 0,
    "sysexValueOffset": 0,
    "isPadding": false,
    "values": {                           // map of value => description
        "0": "OFF",
        "1": "MOD:CC01",
        "2": "BRETH:CC02",
        "3": "CC03",
        "4": "FOOT:CC04",
        "5": "PTIME:CC05",
        "6": "DENT:CC06",
        ...
    ]
}
```
Some parameters can have a measurement name attached (such as db or cent) and also there is scaling applied to the original data value:
```json
{
"id": "RELEASE",
"description": "Comp Release Time",
"byteOffset": 2,
"byteLength": 1,
"sysexOffset": 2,
"lengthSysex": 1,
"dataRange": [
    0,
    99
],
"initValue": 0,
"sysexValueOffset": 0,
"isPadding": false,
"values": null,
"displayMeasurement": "ms",         // 
"displayRange": [                   // scale dataRange to displayRange
    "10",
    "1000"
]
}
```

### Subblock Parameters

When a block contains a subblock (whether from a `group->block` or a `block->subblock`), it contains a parameter entry that references it, in the `.js` version, it is already linked through property `block`

```json
"WMT" : {
    "id": "WMT",                        // subblock ID (from XML)
    "blockName": "INST_CMN_WMT",        // name of the separate block created for this subblock
    "count": 4,                         // number of array instances
    "byteOffset": 28,                   // byte offset of item #0 (code should calculate addresses in real time)
    "blockByteLength": 28,              // size of a single subblock instance
    "byteLength": 112,                  // total size (blockByteLength * count)
    "description": "WMT",               // description from XML

    // only in.js version
    "block": ZenProperties["INST_CMN_WMT"]
}
```

The referenced block (`INST_CMN_WMT` in this example) exists as a separate top-level block with its own `parameters` object. Subblock parameters are identified by the presence of the `blockName` field.

**Array Item Address Calculation**: For array items (subblocks or blocks in groups), `byteOffset` stores the address of item #0. To calculate the address of item `i`, use: `address = byteOffset + (i * blockByteLength)`. The HTML documentation output shows all array items with their calculated addresses, but the JSON/JS output stores only the base offset for efficiency.

### Group Structure

Groups are containers for blocks and have a similar structure to blocks:

```json
  "VoDsgn": {
    "name": "VoDsgn",
    "description": "Voice Design",
    "byteLength": 136,
    "parameters": {
      "PCMT_CMN": {
        "blockName": "PCMT_CMN",
        "count": 1,
        "byteOffset": 0,
        "blockByteLength": 32,
        "byteLength": 32
      },
      "PCMS_PMT": {
        "blockName": "PCMS_PMT",
        "count": 4,
        "byteOffset": 32,
        "blockByteLength": 26,
        "byteLength": 104
      }
    }
  }
```

Groups contain a `parameters` object where each entry references a block. Block references within groups use the same structure as subblock parameters: `byteOffset` stores the address of item #0, and addresses for array items are calculated at runtime.

## Changelog
**Build 7 - Categories and Structure Documentation**

- **Category field added**: All blocks now have a `category` field (format: `"Autogenerated: <config_name>"`). This is used to organize HTML output into category sections.

- **HTML output organized by category**: The HTML documentation is now split into sections by category, with a top-level table of contents listing all categories. Each category section contains its own TOC for groups and blocks, followed by the detailed tables.

- **Conditional isPadding field**: The `isPadding` property is now only included in JSON/JS output when it's `true`, reducing output size and making it easier to identify padding parameters.

- **Default category handling**: In HTML generation, blocks without a category are assigned `"Unnamed Category"` to ensure all items are properly categorized.

- **STRUCTURE.md added**: A compact reference document describing the output object structure, designed to help LLMs and developers quickly understand the format.

**Build 6 - Standalone HTML Generation**

- **Removed TableGen dependency**: HTML tables are now generated directly without the TableGen library. All table generation code is self-contained in `generateHTMLFromZenProperties.js`.

- **Removed text output**: Plain text (`.txt`) output has been removed. Only HTML output is generated for documentation.

- **Standalone generateHTML module**: The `generateHTMLFromZenProperties.js` module is now fully standalone and can be used independently. It takes a ZenProperties object and generates HTML without requiring external template files or dependencies.

- **Integrated HTML template**: The HTML template is now embedded directly in `generateHTMLFromZenProperties.js`, eliminating the need for a separate `template.html` file.

**Build 5**

- **Subblock parameters use single byteOffset value**: When a parameter references a subblock (indicated by the presence of a `blockName` field), the `byteOffset` field contains the address of item #0. Addresses for other array items are calculated at runtime using: `address = byteOffset + (index * blockByteLength)`. This applies to both subblocks within blocks and block references within groups. The HTML documentation output shows all array items with their calculated addresses for reference.

- **Property name changes**: 
  - `lengthBytes` has been renamed to `byteLength` for consistency with the `byteLength` property used at the block level.
  - `totalByteLength` has been renamed to `byteLength` in groups and block references within groups for consistency with the naming convention used throughout the codebase.

**Build 4 - JavaScript Port**

Converted from PHP to JavaScript (Node.js). Now uses `fast-xml-parser` for XML parsing.
Run with `node decode.js <config_name> [output_dir]` instead of `php decode.php <config_name>`.

**Format Changes in Build 4:**

The JSON output format has been unified in Build 4:

- **Blocks and Groups are now the same structure**: Both blocks and groups are stored as top-level objects in the JSON. Groups contain references to blocks with array information, but the structure is consistent.

- **Parameters are now objects keyed by ID**: The `parameters` field in blocks is now an object (not an array) where each parameter is keyed by its `id`. This allows direct access to parameters by ID (e.g., `block.parameters.NAME_1` instead of searching through an array).

- **Subblocks are created as separate blocks**: When a block contains a `<subblock>` element, the subblock is parsed as a separate block definition (e.g., `INST_CMN_WMT` is a separate block from `INST_CMN`). The parent block contains a parameter entry that references the subblock.


**Build 3**

Added `displayMeasurement` and `displayRange`. Fixes invalid item issues with EQ section.
Added ModelSyn and PCM Rythm structures to output, plus some model data.
Changed `valueOffset` to `sysexValueOffset` as it only influences data sent by sysex.

## Limitations

Doesn't fully/correctly process all the xml files, not sure how it all fits together as a whole, so just picking the parts I know I need right now.

Currently doesn't not process `<alternate>` sections for union types (e.g. MFX or Model)
